Documentation: add a more detailed guide for react native development (#35529)
WordPress/gutenberg: docs/how-to-guides/native-mobile/osx-first-time-setup-guide.md

# A first-time setup guide to native mobile development (OSX)

Are you interested in contributing to native mobile development? This
guide is a detailed walk through designed to get you up and running!

Note that the following instructions here are primarily focused on the

> OSX environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OSX environment. For other environments, [the React Native quickstart documentation](https://reactnative.dev/docs/environment-setup) has helpful pointers and steps for getting set up.
```
How about pointing to the RN doc here in case someone needs guidance for other environments?

Author: Updated in https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/35529/commits/ada0609a2cc4568a1d4c51b7fb75c48c4ebe583d

switch between different node and npm versions of your choosing.

Some good options are [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) or [volta](https://volta.sh/).

Pick one and follow the install instructions noted on their website.

Then run:
```sh
nvm install lts/*
nvm alias default lts/* #sets this as the default when opening a new terminal
nvm use #switches to the project settings
```
Or
```sh
volta install node #defaults to installing lts
```

Then install dependencies from your Gutenberg checkout folder:
```
npm ci
```

#### Do you have an older existing Gutenberg checkout?

If you have an existing Gutenberg checkout be sure to fully clean node_modules and re-install dependencies.
This may help avoid errors in the future.

```sh
npm run distclean
npm ci
```

## Unit Tests

Unit tests should work at this point.

```sh
npm run native test
```

## iOS

The easiest way to figure out what needs to be installed is using the
[react native doctor](https://reactnative.dev/blog/2019/11/18/react-native-doctor). From your checkout, or
relative to `/packages/react-native-editor folder`, run:

```sh
npx @react-native-community/cli doctor
```

[Add screenshot of cli doctor]

> See if doctor can fix both "common" and "iOS" issues. At this stage "Android" will still have ❌s for items.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See if `doctor` can fix both "common" and "iOS" issues. (Don't worry if "Android" still has ❌s at this stage, we'll get to those later!)
```
As we can't be certain that the reader won't have their Android set up ready at this point, how about the tweaked wording to account for that?

Author: Updated in https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/35529/commits/ada0609a2cc4568a1d4c51b7fb75c48c4ebe583d

hidden behind the "Show package details" checkbox, check it, since our build requires specific versions for E2E and
development:

[Add screenshot of the package manager with the checkbox annotated]

Check all related packages from [build.gradle](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/blob/trunk/packages/react-native-editor/android/build.gradle).
Then click on "Apply" to download items. There may be other related dependencies from build.gradle files in node_modules.
If you don’t want to dig through files, stack traces will complain of missing packages, but it does take quite a number
of tries if you go through this route.

[Add screenshot of example package list]

For good measure, let’s also set the project SDK in Android Studio in File > Project Structure

[Add screenshot of project structure]

Then set it to our current SDK target 29:

[Add screenshot of project settings]

### Update Paths

Export the following env variables and update $PATH. We can normally add this to our ` ~/.zshrc` file if we're using zsh
in our terminal, or `.bash_profile` if the terminal is still using bash.

```sh

> export JAVA_HOME=/Applications/Android\ Studio.app/Contents/jre/jdk/Contents/Home

Author: Reminder to note that this changed to a slightly different path in Arctic Fox
```
export JAVA_HOME="/Applications/Android Studio.app/Contents/jre/Contents/Home"
```

> export ANDROID_HOME=/Users/{your-username}/Library/Android/sdk

Reviewer: @gwwar, I'm curious whether the following paths also work for you? These are what I have in my `~/.zshrc` file, which I got from [the React Native docs:](https://reactnative.dev/docs/environment-setup):

```
export ANDROID_HOME=$HOME/Android/Sdk
export PATH=$PATH:$ANDROID_HOME/emulator
export PATH=$PATH:$ANDROID_HOME/tools
export PATH=$PATH:$ANDROID_HOME/tools/bin
export PATH=$PATH:$ANDROID_HOME/platform-tools
```
As those are directly from the official docs, I'd lean towards using them, but let me know if they don't work as expected for you.

Author: They don't, but let me see if there's a way to consistently install in that directory.

Also is there a smarter way to install needed packages? I had to lookup needed items in the build.gradle file.

Author: So I do like the updated paths relative to `$HOME` 👍  I left a note inline on where the SDK home location can be modified. By default a new install on OSX will recommend `$HOME/Library/Android/sdk`

I also had to set JAVA_HOME. I pointed this at what comes with Android studio which is convenient. If there's a better alternative, I'm open to changes.

One other note is that I have a working environment on my Intel Mac but not my new M1. Currently getting stuck here with this trace:
<img width="1222" alt="CleanShot 2021-10-25 at 15 41 53@2x" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1270189/138781247-8c761d45-e4de-4e5f-8537-ea96e3270032.png">

Reviewer: > Also is there a smarter way to install needed packages? I had to lookup needed items in the build.gradle file.

I'm afraid the only way I'm aware of is manually looking up the needed packages (I did that through [the docs](https://reactnative.dev/docs/environment-setup) in my case, but your approach is also valid). I had a quick search to see if there were perhaps any Android Studio plugins to automate the process, but wasn't able to find anything. 

> One other note is that I have a working environment on my Intel Mac but not my new M1. Currently getting stuck here with this trace

@twstokes also ran into some problems running the demo app on an M1 and found he needed to install Platform S packages. These were the specific steps here shared:  

* In Android Studio, go to Preferences -> Appearance & Behavior -> System Settings -> Android SDK.
* Check “Show Package Details” at the bottom right.
* If not already selected, under “Android S Preview” check:
  * Android SDK Platform S
  * Google APIs ARM 64
  * Google Play ARM 64
* Click OK.

And a screenshot of his settings:

![screen-shot-2021-07-03-at-12 58 02](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2998162/138863109-0d553234-ecfc-40a2-8aac-e0fad63e81a2.png)

Another issue that Tanner came across is a bug that prevents the Android emulator from loading. This was in May, so hopefully, there will have been a fix by now. If not, Tanner followed the workaround outlined in [this Medium article](https://medium.com/mobile-app-development-publication/m1-android-emulator-not-detected-workaround-c7718f08ba99). 

I don't have an M1 but, if installing the Platform S packages doesn't get things working for you, we could see if Tanner or others on the project have further ideas here. Let me know how it goes! (and thank you again for all the work documenting this!)

Reviewer: Noting for posterity that, following https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/36007 and the comment here https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/36007#pullrequestreview-791037693, it doesn't seem like separate instructions for M1 are now necessary. 🎉

export ANDROID_AVD_HOME=/Users/{your-username}/.android/avd
export ANDROID_SDK_ROOT=/Users/{your-username}/Library/Android/sdk
export ANDROID_NDK=/Users/{your-username}/Library/Android/ndk
export PATH=$PATH:$ANDROID_HOME/tools:$ANDROID_HOME/platform-tools
```

Save then source, or open a new terminal to pick up changes.
```sh
source ~/.zshrc
```
or
```sh
source ~/.bash_profile
```
### Create a new device image

Next, let’s create a virtual device image. Click on the phone icon with an android to the bottom-right.

[Add screenshot]

This brings up the “Android Virtual Device Manager” or (AVD). Click on “Create Virtual Device”.

[Add screenshot]

Pick a phone type of your choice:

[Add screenshot]

Pick the target SDK version. This is the targetSdkVersion set in the
[build.gradle](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/blob/trunk/packages/react-native-editor/android/build.gradle) file.

[Add screenshot]

There are some advanced settings we can toggle, but these are optional. Click finish.

[Add screenshot]

### Putting it all together

Start metro:

```
npm run native start:reset
```

> In another terminal run the following. The emulator doesn’t need to be launched previously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In another terminal run the following to launch the demo app in the Android emulator (if the emulator isn't already running, it'll also be launched as part of this command):
```
How about tweaking the wording here? I wasn't clear on the mention of the emulator at first.

Author: Changes read well to me, updated in https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/35529/commits/ada0609a2cc4568a1d4c51b7fb75c48c4ebe583d
